---
title: "#1: mRNA vaccines, Impact of adblockers, DIY Mission Control"
date: 2021-02-05
number: 1
---

Hi!

You’re probably wondering: "when did I sign up for this?". The answer is: a long time ago.

I started collecting e-mail addresses in 2018, but it took me until today to send my first newsletter. I hope you don’t mind!

I won’t spam you. This newsletter will be sent at most once a month. It’ll highlight the latest Simply Explained video, blog posts, and some random stuff I get excited about.

<!--more-->

---

## Latest video
mRNA vaccines are currently being rolled out to combat COVID19. In this video, I explain how they work.

{% render "youtube-embed.html", videoId:"WOvvyqJ-vwo" %}

They have the potential of deeply impacting our world, even beyond COVID19.

This video sparked a lot of questions. So [I made a follow-up video where I answer 10 frequently asked questions]({% link collections.videos, "videos/mrna-vaccines-questions-and-misconceptions.md" %}). Is it safe? What are the side-effects? What are adjuvants? …

## Featured blog posts

**[Impact of Adblockers on Google Analytics (vs. Plausible)]({% link collections.posts, "2020-10-27-impact-adblockers-on-google-analytics-vs-plausible.md" %})**  
Adblocker usage is rising, with some estimates saying that almost 25% of internet users have one installed.
In this blog post, I look at how adblockers affect web analytics. Conclusion: up to 20% of visits aren’t tracked because of them.

## Cool stuff I found on the internet

### [The Day You Became A Better Writer](https://dilbertblog.typepad.com/the_dilbert_blog/2007/06/the_day_you_bec.html)
A short blog post about the importance of learning how to write. Basically: keep things short and to the point. And assume your readers aren’t very bright.

### [How the placenta evolved from an ancient virus](https://dilbertblog.typepad.com/the_dilbert_blog/2007/06/the_day_you_bec.html)
While researching for [my mRNA vaccine video]({% link collections.videos, "videos/mrna-vaccines.md" %}), I discovered retroviruses. These can integrate their DNA into ours. They become a part of us. In the case of HIV, that’s very harmful. But certain retroviruses have been essential for us. This post talks about how the placenta is a result of such a virus. (The placenta is what allows mammals to reproduce without killing their offspring)

### [OpenMCT: Your own Mission Control](https://dilbertblog.typepad.com/the_dilbert_blog/2007/06/the_day_you_bec.html)
NASA open-sourced a version of their Mission Control software. I’m giving this a spin and pretend I’m a flight director ;)

<br><br>

That was my first newsletter. Let me know what you thought by replying to this email. And remember: keep learning!